Today we're talking about the social
media algorithm. If you want to get more
views with less effort, it's critical
you understand how the algorithms
actually work. And once you learn this,
I guarantee you will never look at
content the same way again. In this
video, I'm going to break down how
social algorithms work, why they pick
certain videos to push over others, and
the specific things you can do to make
them prioritize your content. Now, this
information is based on a ton of outlier
data and comments made by the Instagram
CEO himself. So, this is the latest and
greatest for what's actually working
right now. If you just follow this, your
content will perform way better. By the
way, if you don't know me, my name is
Callaway. I have a million followers,
I've done billions of views, and content
is all I do all day long. All right,
first, let's just start with how the
algorithms actually work. And this is
actually super helpful to understand.
Once you hear it, it'll make a lot of
sense. Social media companies only have
one goal, to keep people on the platform
as long as possible. When people stay
longer, they watch more ads, and the
companies make more money. It's as
simple as that. Now, to keep you on the
platform longer, they do their best to
serve you the content they think you'll
enjoy the most. And that means the
algorithm is just one giant matchmaker.
It's matching people with content. If it
does a good job with this matching,
you're going to keep watching and stay.
But if it starts doing a bad job and it
shows you stuff you don't want to watch,
well then you're going to leave. It
sounds simple, but this is how social
algorithms work in a nutshell. Now,
here's why this matters for you. If you
want to hijack the algorithm and make it
push your video more, all you have to do
is help it make better matches with your
content. [music] So, in this video, I'm
going to explain exactly how to do that.
And this really is the highest leverage
algo hack you could ever learn. Okay,
now here's how this matchmaking process
actually works under the hood, so we can
understand exactly what to do to
manipulate it. When you post a video on
social media, the very first thing the
platform does is analyze what that video
is about. I call this a digital
fingerprint. Now, this analysis is
multimodal, so it's watching your video
with computer vision to understand
what's going on visually. It's listening
to your video with audio fingerprinting
to get a better understanding of the
transcript and what's actually being
said, and it's also reading all the
metadata, the caption, the hashtag, the
creator, the location, anything else it
can find. It then combines all that
information together in real time to
build a single contextual understanding
of the video. This is called a topic
mapping. Now, based on that topic
mapping, the algorithm builds a fit
score, which is its prediction for who
it thinks will best like this video. So,
at this point, you've posted it, it's
analyzed it, but it hasn't been shown to
anyone yet. So, we're ready to start
showing the video to people. But, this
is where things get interesting, because
obviously the algorithm doesn't just
blast your video off to millions of
people right off the bat, or you'd have
millions of views. This is what actually
goes on under the hood. The algorithm
uses its fit score to pick roughly 200
people to show the video to first. This
is called the initial sample test group.
If it could rank all 100 million people
that are on the app at one time, this is
the group of 200 people it thinks will
like the video the most. Now, very
important, of these 200 people, most of
them are non-followers, because the
algorithm wants to test how well
strangers react to your video. It knows
followers should like it, cuz they
already follow you, but if strangers
like it, too, well, then that means this
is a really good video. This is why when
people say followers don't matter
anymore, they're kind of right. They
don't matter in the sampling process,
because most of those 200 people are
non-followers. They're strangers to you.
Now, based on the metrics from this
initial sample group of 200 people, the
algorithm is going to get positive,
neutral, or negative data back.
Essentially, of those 200, how many of
them liked and watched the video? What
was the set of data? If the data is
positive, that means the algorithm's
guess of the fit score was accurate. And
so, it knows exactly what type of person
to push the video to further. The next
time it pushes, let's say it's 2,000
people. And if that's good, then it's
20,000 people. And if that's good, then
it's 200,000 people. And it just keeps
going until the data starts coming back
weaker. Now, if the original data was
neutral, kind of good, kind of bad, the
algorithm will redo its fit score and
push the video again. But this time,
only to maybe another group of 200. It
doesn't go crazy to 20,000. It just
resamples. If the data is negative right
off the bat with those 200, well then
the algo's going to tighten up and stop
pushing almost immediately. And again,
it slows down that push because it
doesn't want to risk alienating people
and pushing them off the platform
because they see a bad video. So, if
you're in the 200 view jail, or you post
a video and it flops, what this really
means is that the algorithm got bad data
back from that initial sample group of
200. Now, one more thing before we move
on this. The reason why even million
view banger videos eventually slow down
is because even those run out of people
that want to watch it. The data gets
bigger, bigger, bigger, and then
eventually it starts to fade off. So, in
a nutshell, this is how social
algorithms actually work under the hood.
This is what happens when you go to post
a video. You post it, it does the topic
mapping, it samples with a group of
roughly 200 people, and then it either
boosts, retries, or stops immediately
based on how the sample data comes back.
So, what does all this actually mean for
you tactically? Knowing this is
happening under the hood, how can you
best adjust your content strategy to
take advantage and get the algorithm to
push you more? That's what we're going
to go through right now.
If you want to hijack the algorithm to
get more views, you only need to do two
things. Number one is to help the
algorithm build a better fit score, so
that it finds the best possible sample
group of 200 people to go to first. And
then number two is to make sure that
sample group actually likes and engages
with your video. Because if the sample
group is the right fit, and they
actually like your video, well then
you're going to be in great shape
because the algo will get amazing data
back and just [music] keep boosting you
to more and more people. So, what I'm
going to do now is break down the
tactics for how to trigger both of those
things. Helping find the right sample
group, and then helping make sure that
sample group engages well. This is
essentially the systematic process for
activating the algorithm and getting it
to work for you. Now, if you like how
I'm breaking this down, kind of from
like a scientific and psychology
perspective, I actually just published a
free guide doing the same thing for my
entire content system. It's from ideas
to hooks all the way to monetization.
Science-based and data-backed. This is
the exact content system I ran last year
to generate hundreds of millions of
views and millions in profit from
content. It's also the same thing I
install with business owners when I work
with them one-on-one. Completely free,
my gift to you. You can get it below or
at the link shortformsytem.co.
All right, let's talk sample groups.
What can you do to help the algorithm
build a better fit score and find a
stronger sample group for your video?
Here's the answer, very simple. All you
have to do is consistently make videos
about the same topic for the same
audience avatar over and over and over.
You want to become intentionally precise
and narrow with the topics you pick and
how you position. Here's why. After a
few similar videos in a row, the
algorithm will start to understand that
your channel talks about X topic for Y
avatar profile. It will then have built
sample groups for all those previous
videos and have a very clear
understanding of who to go back to from
an avatar perspective. The more this
avatar group is the same over time, the
more confident the algorithm can be when
it dials this in. Now, this process of
consistently making videos about the
same few topics for the same avatar is
called audience matching. And if there's
one content principle I swear by, it's
this. When you make videos for lots of
different topics for several different
avatars, the sample data comes back
mixed and the algorithm gets confused.
When it's confused, it pushes your video
less because it doesn't want to risk bad
fits to bad viewers. For example,
imagine you made three videos. One on
tech, then the next one on health
trends, and then the next one on
politics. The algorithm would have no
idea what your fourth video is going to
be about. And because of this, it
doesn't know which of your previous
three videos it should model its fit
score after. So, let's say your fourth
video also ends up being about health
trends. Chances are the algorithm's
going to build a blended fit score
across those first three videos. A
little bit of people from tech, a little
bit of people from health trends, and a
little bit of people from politics. Not
literally those people, but influence
from who liked those videos. And when it
does this, the fit score targeting for
your fourth video is going to be a mix
of all three. And so, when it pushes it,
of course, the sample data for the
health trends video that also has tech
and politics type viewers is going to
come back weak. This will result almost
certainly in your video flopping. What
this means in simple terms is that if
you want to help the algorithm find the
right sample group and build a better
fit score, you got to keep your topics
and audience selection narrow
consistently. And this means sometimes
saying no to ideas that seem viral, but
would resonate with the wrong audience.
Even one viral hit to an audience
outside of your core demo will result in
the next several videos having poor
sample data because it confuses the
algorithm. This discipline in topic and
audience selection is very important,
and typically beginners that are
starting out are spraying and praying
all over the place, and they don't have
this. Okay, so that's one side of the
equation. Very simply, just narrow your
topic and audience, and your sample fit
will go up. Now, on the other side of
the equation, the two-part piece was
making sure, once you have that sample,
that it actually engages well with your
video. And that means they watch it,
they like it, they save it, they share
it, they comment, they repost, all the
engagement metrics, as many as we can
possibly get.
>> [music]
>> So, what can we do on this side to make
sure that initial sample data from these
people comes back strong? Well, when the
algorithm's gauging if it's strong or
not, it's really only looking at three
core metrics. The first one is average
watch time. How long did someone watch
in a number of seconds per video? And
also, by proxy, percent completion. What
percent of the video was completed on
average? The second metric is engagement
rate. So, this is likes plus comments
plus shares divided by views. And the
third, which is really important and
nobody can access, is called watch time
session share. In a session for a
viewer, if they're on there for 60
minutes, how many of those 60 were spent
watching your videos? That percentage is
watch time session share. You can't
access this anywhere, but it's a
critical metric that social algorithms
use to know how influential your content
is.
>> [music]
>> So, the million-dollar question for you
is how can you improve these metrics?
What can you do in your video to make
sure those metrics go up so the sample
data comes back clean, so that it just
pushes your video to more people? Well,
a short, cheeky answer is if you want
the metrics to go up, you just make
better videos with better ideas,
stronger hooks, better storytelling, and
more interesting visuals, obviously.
But, that's not helpful at all. So, is
there anything tactical you can do at a
studs level to increase the
effectiveness of those videos? And if
you watch this channel a lot, you
already know, of course there is.
There's only four things you need to do
to make your video better so that that
engagement rate goes off the charts.
>> [music]
>> Number one is that the topic needs to be
relevant for the ideal viewer. This is
obvious, and it goes with the first
piece I said. What you cover has to
actually solve a problem that they have.
If that's the case, engagement will go
up. Number two, the information you
share needs to be both non-obvious and
tactically implementable. Is it new
stuff they haven't heard before, and can
they actually use it to solve that
problem? If those things are true, the
engagement rate will go up. Number
three, the viewer has to actually have a
high absorption of the information you
say. It could be on target and
non-obvious, but if they can't actually
understand what you're saying, then they
can't apply it. So, if they could apply
it, the engagement rate will go up. And
then number four, there needs to be a
short distance to implement your
recommendations. Tactically
implementable means they can take a
little bit of action and get a big
result based on your promise. Now, you
won't typically hear people frame it in
this way, but if your content has those
four attributes, I guarantee you're
going to have higher engagement. If you
have higher engagement, the data comes
back more positive, they push it to more
of the people, those people are people
you want, and the flywheel spins. What
this really means, those four things in
layman's terms, you got to cover a core
pain point or problem they have. You got
to have something useful or interesting
to say. You got to say it in a way they
can actually understand, and they have
to be able to take what you say and
apply it on their own. Those are the
four horsemen to driving good video
performance. If you do this, you're set,
and that's really all you need to hijack
the algorithm to push you more. Pick an
avatar, stick to it, narrow your topic
selection, and then drive those four
things home. When you do this, the
sample group will stay dialed, and
they'll all engage with the video at a
high rate. Incidentally, these four
factors are also how you turn viewers
into buyers. If you want people to buy,
those four components also make sense to
include in the video. They're kind of
like the core DNA if you're trying to
build a money machine with content. Now,
I'll say this, the easiest way to make
sure you're picking the right topics
that actually work for your avatar group
is to just study the videos that are
already working in your niche. It shocks
me how few people actually do this, but
in sandcastles.ai, you can build a group
of competitor channels that are already
crushing, and just filter by outlier
score to see all the best performing
videos. There's now this feature where
if you save the video to library, you
can see all the attributes. I'm talking
transcript, topic, the exact hook, the
exact storytelling mechanics, everything
about the video that drove the
curiosity. You can then take that, remix
it. Everything you need is right in
there. So, all you need to do if you're
confused on which topics to pick for
your avatar group, just go in
sandcastles and use this resource. It
shocks me how few people are using data
to make their topic decision. This
basically guarantees that you're serving
the right stuff to your audience. Now,
before I end this video, I just want to
include one more bonus topic around the
algorithm. Because I know my explanation
is a little bit theoretical, hopefully
it made sense, hopefully it helped you,
you have action items to work on. But, I
just want to include one more thing at a
tactical level that you can take away
and really hammer value from this video.
Another way to drive algorithmic push is
to increase the number of comments on
your video. Most people know this. There
are five things you can do tactically to
increase the number of comments you're
getting. Number one is to take a hard
stance on your topic. People typically
comment when they violently agree or
disagree, mostly disagree, with whatever
your stance is or perspective. If you
play the middle and hedge, you're going
to get fewer comments. So, I recommend
you pick a side, pro or con, and that
will drive comments. [music] Number two
is to pick the side that is the
contrarian side. Like I said, people
love to comment when they disagree, when
they think you're wrong. If you pick the
contrarian side, that means you think
the majority of people are wrong, which
means they'll think you're wrong. The
majority of people will want to comment
because they disagree with you. If you
create more enemies, you drive more
comments. Tip number three is to amplify
the stance you take by ratcheting up the
way you frame your points. If you said
something like, "This is the best way to
cook pasta." versus, "This pasta is
better than all the mom and pop pasta
shops in the world." Which one is going
to drive a more violent discussion in
the comments? The more extreme version,
of course, always is. So, that's how you
ratchet up your stance. Tip number four
is to build your topics around
cult-loved brands, people, ideas, and
movements. The more you talk about
things people already have made up their
opinion on, the faster they're willing
to jump into the comments, especially if
they disagree. For example, if you take
a stance on Nike versus just the
category of shoes, more people will have
already made up their opinion whether
they like or dislike Nike, and it will
trigger them to comment. Tip number five
is to position your take or stance to
drive significant emotion. The more
people feel something when they watch
your video, the more they're going to
feel compelled to want to comment. Now,
those five things around comment, that
was just a little extra sprinkle to give
you more tactics on how to drive
activation and engagement to make the
algorithm push you. All of those feed
back to picking the right topic for the
right group. So, it's kind of like a sub
point on what I just went through.
Hopefully that's helpful and you can put
that to use. All right, guys. That's all
I've got for this video. As a recap, we
covered a lot of ground. We really broke
down the ins and outs of how social
algorithms work and how you
theoretically and fundamentally can
hijack them to push your videos more. I
tried my best to kind of demystify this
black box and give you tactics that you
can use to your advantage. As always,
guys, I'm trying my absolute best to
give you perspectives that most people
don't cover in a tactical bite-size way
that you can actually put to work. What
you typically see about the algorithm is
talking about settings, hacks, or these
little caption tweaks. None of that
stuff actually works. If you think that
actually works, you need to watch this
video again. Posting time does not
matter. Hashtags in your captions don't
matter. The captions themselves don't
matter. The only thing that matters is
making great videos for a specific
avatar group across a narrow band of
topics over and over and over. That's
the only thing that matters. That is the
cake. Everything else is the icing.
Focus on the cake. As a reminder, if you
want access to my full content system,
this is the exact blueprint I use with
my own team. How I find ideas, how I
write hooks, how I validate these
things, how I do research, my entire
funnel to turn viewers into dollars,
literally everything. I've got it linked
below for free, my gift to you,
shortformsytem.co.
And if you have any other topics around
social media growth, around content and
content systems that you want me to
cover or that you feel blocked on, just
drop them in the comments. We use the
comments to inform the database of
videos that we make next. So, anything
you guys are stuck on, please put it in
the comments. It will help greatly to
inform what we should make. All right,
guys. That's all we've got. We will see
you on the next video. Peace.